---
layout: single-toc-on-top
classes: wide
title: Prepare a study - Introduction
permalink: /prepare-a-study/
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "prepare-a-study"
---

## Introduction

In our every day lives, we leave behind large amounts of digital traces. For example, we create digital traces when browsing through social media, when sending an e-mail, when making bank transactions, or when checking into public transportation. The term digital trace data refers to any data that is created as a result of a digital interaction (Howison et al., 2011). These data can range from a list of videos one watched on YouTube or Instagram, to complete personality profiles based on previously used search terms on Google. 

Digital trace data have valuable applications in social scientific research. For instance, they have several advantages over data collected through self-reports (Sen et al., 2021; Stier et al., 2020). First, digital trace data can provide more granular insights compared to self-reports. To illustrate, van Driel et al. (2022) were able to study adolescent’s Instagram use on a level of detail that would not have been possible by means of self-reports. Second, digital trace data can provide more objective measurements on sensitive topics than self-reports. For example, Jungherr (2015) discusses how Twitter data potentially can be used to poll voting behavior. Third, digital trace data can provide more objective measurements on topics that would require participant to recall their memory when measured by self-reports. To illustrate, Ohme et al. (2021) found how digital trace data provide more valid measurements for smartphone usage under Dutch adolescents compared to self-reports. Likewise, Chi et al. (2020) show how location logs of mobile phones can provide more precise measurement on migration events than currently used self-reports do. Digital trace data can be obtained in several ways (Breuer et al., 2020). As a first method, webscraping can be used to systematically collect digital trace data from web pages. Some platforms provide APIs to regulate web scraping of their websites. A second method to obtain digital trace data is by collaborating with digital platforms (e.g. see Social Science One; King and Persily, 2020). A third method is by buying data from market research companies or data resellers that have obtained their data beforehand (Breuer et al., 2020). Each of these three methods has potential disadvantages, such as high costs and restricted availability of data. Furthermore, lack of consent by people concerning the data can be considered a drawback for all three of these collection methods.

An alternative way of collecting digital trace data, taking into account several of the drawbacks of the other collection methods, is by means of data donation (Boeschoten, Araujo, et al., 2022). When using data donation, participants obtain their own digital trace data and donate these to the researcher. This method relies on digital platforms collecting digital trace data on their users. Due to privacy legislation, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR; European Union, 2016) in the European Union and the United Kingdom, digital platforms (which can be any data processing entity and are also referred to as data controllers) are obliged to supply a copy of all data they collected on their users upon request by the person concerning the data (Veale & Ausloos, 2021; Wachter, 2018). This legislation holds for any digital trace data collected, because digital trace data are legally treated as personal data. Digital platforms typically comply to the request for a data copy by supplying so called data download packages (DDPs; Boeschoten, Mendrik, et al., 2022). DDPs often are .zip-files that contain other files with all collected data, such as .txt-files,.HTML-files, .JSON-files, .mp4-files, and .jpg-files (Boeschoten et al., 2021). After obtaining their DDPs, participants can choose to (partly) donate these DDPs after giving active informed consent. By asking for active action and consent of participants, the lack of consent by the people concerning the data, occurring in other collection methods, is overcome. Furthermore, the usage of DDPs provides high amounts of data without having high costs, overcoming the other disadvantages the other collection methods present.

As a result of using DDPs, one challenge in data donation studies is dealing with the rich amount of personal and potentially sensitive data. Typically, the researcher is interested specific parts of the data in the DDP, coming forth from a specific research purpose, as required by the GDP(Hoofnagle et al., 2019). In recent years, several approaches to preserve privacy of participants andto filter the data of interest in data donation studies have been used. These approaches differ in their way of de-identifying or pre-processing the data prior to data donation. To investigate social media use and well-being among adolescents, van Driel et al. (2022) collected complete Instagram DDPs which were de-identified prior to further analysis (Boeschoten et al., 2021) prior to further analysis. Kmetty and N´emeth (2022) used Facebook DDPs to study the validity of survey answers on music preferences. They de-identified the data immediately, under supervision of the participant. Another alternative tool to preserve privacy in data donation is OSD2F (Araujo et al., 2021). OSD2F extracts raw data from the DDPs, but allows participants to delete extracted data points. This way, participants have control in what exactly is donated to the researcher. A last approach to privacy preservation in data donation is Port, developed by Boeschoten, Mendrik, et al. (2022). In Port, DDPs of interest are subjected to local processing, meaning that target data are extracted from the DDP and summarized to aggregated, de-identified output data. Local processing happens locally on the participant’s device, ensuring no data are shared during the processing yet. Participants then are presented with the aggregated data and can consent on donating those data. Although all these different approaches to privacy preservation in data donation are currently
being used in studies, an established infrastructure for data donation studies is still missing. To fill this gap, several infrastructures for data donation studies are currently under development. Pfiffner et al. (2022) created the Data Donation Module1, a platform to help researchers setting up a data donation project and to collect data donations. Likewise, Gomez Ortega et al. (2021) developed a platform based on the ideas of Designerly Data Donation2, supporting data donation studies aimed at designers (Ahn, 2023). Lastly, Boeschoten et al. (2023) are currently further developing Port, integrating functionalities of OSD2F, and are developing a platform assisting researcher in preparing their data donation studies.

As with all studies where data collection takes place, decisions are made when designing the study, potentially affecting the quality of the collected data. Total Error frameworks (TE frameworks) are a commonly used approach to summarize all potential forms of error that can influence data quality (e.g. see Biemer, 2010, 2016). An acknowledged example of a TE framework is the Total Survey Error by Groves (1989), which makes the distinction between potential errors affecting what is being measured and what population the data collection aims to represent. Over time, new frameworks have been developed for specific approaches to data collection or new data types, such as for big data (Amaya et al., 2020), collection of digital trace data (Sen et al., 2021), integrated data (Zhang, 2012), and data collection related to criminology (Snaphaan et al., 2022). Furthermore, Boeschoten, Araujo, et al. (2022) designed a TE framework specifically for data donation.

The TE framework for data donation illustrates that data donation studies consist of several elements. Each of these elements can introduce potential sources of error and possibly threaten the study quality when conducted carelessly. In this paper, we introduce a workflow for researchers interested in conducting a data donation study. This workflow addresses potential challenges and sources of error and takes these into account. The potential challenges covered with our framework were identified based on the TE framework and our experiences with conducting data donation studies. With this workflow, we aim to increase the quality of future data donation studies.

The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of the proposed workflow for preparing a data donation study. Each step of the workflow is then discussed in more detail in the succeeding sections and potential challenges are identified. Section 3 explains how a research idea is concretized to a data donation research idea. Section 4 describes the construction of the data donation study design. Section 5 discusses the feature extraction script. Section 6 discusses the data donation software and configuration of this tool. Section 7 provides an overview on ethical and legal aspects of data donation studies. Section 8 discusses the final steps of the workflow that lead from a pilot study to a full data donation study. Section 9 concludes the paper by linking potential challenges in the workflow to the TE framework, illustrating that the proposed workflow is designed to account for all sources of error that can arise during data collection using data donation.
