---
layout: single
title:  Acounting for DDP volatility and testing the script
permalink: /best-practices-in-data-donation/local-extraction/acounting-for-DDP-volatility-and-testing-the-script
toc: false
sidebar:
  nav: "best-practices-in-data-donation"
---

While building the extraction script, attention should be paid to making the script robust. In order to attain this, the research engineer should code the script as generic as possible. DDPs show volatility in their structure and content, which should be accounted for in the extraction script. This volatility shows in several ways. First, the type of device can lead to variation in DDPs of the same platform. For example, in the WhatsApp example study it was found that DDPs of iPhones (Apple devices) and DDPs of phones with an Android operational system differed in the way some data was present, such as timestamps and references to media files. Second, DDPs of a platform might become different when the language of the device where the DDP is requested differ. In the example study on inferred interests, the research engineer encountered that ‘key labels’ in the JSON structures of the DDPs differed when the DDP changed in language. Similarly, in the WhatsApp example study, WhatsApp DDPs changed in terminology used when the DDP was requested under different language settings. Third, structures and content of DDPs can also change over time. For example, when the platform adds new features or has a new update, the DDP can also change. This happened in the WhatsApp study during the period of data collection. The script was no longer able to handle the updated structure and data extraction failed for part of the participants.

Once the full draft extraction script has been constructed and accounts for diversity in DDPs, the script should be tested extensively. It is important to include as many different DDPs as possible in this testing, to map the potential presence of volatility. Variation in test DDPs could be achieved by actively reaching out to people that use the targeted platform in varying ways. Variations in language, devices, and settings are necessary to include in the testing procedure to get maximum value out of the testing. These variations need to be representative for the variation that will be present in the study population. In order to test systematically, good logging systems, as described in section 5.2, can provide concrete results and indications on script elements that need adjustments. Testing and adjusting or improving the script form a simultaneous and iterative process that should ultimately lead to a final robust script.